welcome everyone to
this week's ipld sync meeting it's
february the first first 2021
and as every week we go over the stuff
that we've done in the last week and
then we talked about
what we plan to do next um
i start with myself
i haven't done that much last week
i guess also some file converts but i
think the most interesting thing for
this group is that
i wrote a small blog post about web
assembly might return
values in today's rust
without wasn't binding and the
background is that in wasm you can have
more than just one return value um in
the new versions
and i thought it would be
straightforward to do this in rust
but it isn't there for the blog post
and the reason why you would want to
have multiple returns is
as web assembly is so restricted to the
return types
if you for example want to return a
string
you return it where you have put it in
the memory and what you need to return
is the
actual position in the memory as well as
the length
so it's two values and so it's way more
convenient than just returning one value
which
you can then read out which has the size
and the position
um so that's quite useful um
and next week is um
for all people who will get protocol
labs
it's a thing called hack week where we
spend time on
projects using our own stack outside of
the scope that we normally work on
and i will work with will
on getting shitsy work
through lib p2p and the idea is that
you don't need a ttc server but just can
somehow talk to someone else remote
in a distributed way that's the idea
we'll see
um probably next week we i have an
update on this
even if it's not ip related um
okay and next on my list is danielle
cool so this past week i was mostly
finishing
um well i mostly got my
hammed adl to agree with file coins
hemmed
on just what the zebra bytes look for a
very simple map
um i was mostly there last week i just
got stuck on the parameters for a long
time
um essentially the default parameters
for the b for the bit width and the hash
algorithm
that the library provides you look
nothing like
what falcon uses apparently and i was
looking at
rod's spec for the real filecon data
but i was incorrectly using the defaults
so once i fix that it actually looks the
same which is nice
and essentially what i need to finish to
make this usable to like
read falcon data assuming i made no
other mistakes
is uh reification so like taking some
um block layer nodes and then
interpreting them as my adl and then
supposedly that should magically work
to read key values from an existing map
um but that's pretty much it i'm gonna i
need to tidy up the code and push it
it's quite a lot of if else code for
filecoin support
and this next week like volker mentioned
we've got the hack week
and my project so far at least is
essentially every implementation of ipfs
desktop but with an electron
and all ipfs desktop does really is
use a lecturing to show a fancy web ui
but that's separate
you can just open it with a browser and
the things i'm gonna
implement are the status tray icon and
sort of the system integrations which
are
easy enough to do with go and the cool
thing with that is that eventually it
could become part of go ipfs
itself it's it's still not like pure
go by nice standards because it's a lot
of sigo
so for example to build windows you need
a windows machine because
because of all the system headers but it
should still be okay i think
we'll see that's it for me
thanks next on the list is michael
hey sorry i'm trying to get my
headphones working real quick so that
you can
hear me a little bit see if that works
okay all right cool um yeah i'm still
trying to write my updates but um
i can just talk about it from a second
um the first one and this
is like so annoying um
ipjs which we use for all of the
javascript builds
um the way that it works is that it like
produces a package json and then
dumps it out and
that ended up surfacing this really
annoying
bug and roll-up and then also just like
an annoying part about how node.js
specified the resolution algorithm
it turns out that the ordering like
really matters
for the keys because the spec kind of
assumes that package.json is a
configuration language and not like the
output of a build tool
um so they really really care about the
ordering so if you have a browser field
and you want to actually
use it literally has to be first um
there's no way around it
and so i fixed that and so that'll work
now when people do it
but there's another really bad bug in
roll up
um which basically
roll up has like these it has logic
that is separate for resolving the main
field
versus the subtree imports even though
they're effectively doing the same thing
and what that means is that it wasn't
actually
including browser in the default import
for sub-imports
even when you had said browser true in
roll up so you're literally telling
roll up hey get brother things and then
you have a thing that says hey i'm the
browser thing for the sub import and it
was like not picking it up
um even when it was first so
you can work around it by adding this
thing to config but it is a bug so
that's like logged and roll up now and i
think that'll have the link in there
um and we're like on like in line to
have it be fixed here
but what that means is that right now
like multi-formats
um es yeah multi-formats
imports of esm in roll-up
of all of the sub-package parts are
broken so you can import the main
package and import all the properties
out of it but you can't do like
multi-format
block right now um so that's dumb
uh other than that um i wrote
uh i've been working on ib sequel
figuring out how to kind of how to
explain how to see
things apart um and now i have like a
sort of fairly well-designed system for
what i'm calling sql proofs
and um i can actually give a little talk
about it with some slides like at the
end of this if we have time
um but but essentially like unlike a
proof of work it's not
providing you something that you can
verify with a fraction of the
computation
the computation is the same to verify
the proof um
but it it reduces all of the data that
you would need
so what happens is that like you do any
operation in sql
and what you get back are sets for the
blocks that are read and written
by that um as well as the new state of
the database
and this ends up being like an amazing
primitive for building all of the
traditional database workflows that you
would want
so replications between any states
can actually be done by diffing these
sets now so we don't have to do
crazy graph traversals we don't have to
like figure out all that logic
you literally like do whatever crazy
thing you want to do in sql we run that
sql engine over
a full traversal for somebody that
actually has all of the data
and then what they produce is something
that oh yeah you can do this now with a
fraction of the data
um and you can treat these things like
crdts because they're one-way functional
transforms now
you can do encrypted versions of the
sets
that don't let the recipient actually
see any of the data just the results
and you can even exchange that back with
the original key holder
and they can use that to calculate all
the same deltas
as they would with the unencrypted
version of this even though
the the person that you shared it with
like couldn't actually see any of that
data
um there's like really cool stuff that
you can do with this now
um that i'm working out in these slides
that i can show in a bit but um yeah
that's kind of the the gist of my update
and what will you work on next week
same thing yeah no
i mean this week for the for the hack
week i want to get um like an in-browser
playground working for ipsequel so you
should be able to like create databases
and
and do sql queries and stuff like that
um yeah and
and hopefully that can actually be
turned into like a tutorial where i talk
about how this stuff works with like in
browser
embeds if i get to that cool
um next one is pedo
yes uh so an iplt front uh still
stuck a little bit in in the big old
school data
place uh but you know almost almost
there
uh other than that i spent a number of
uh last week and
uh today as well with the dean kind of
mapping out well
helping him map out uh
the ability to get large blocks
through bit swap which uh from our
perspective you can basically think of
it as
uh how to move around uh large streams
without opening yourself to videos
uh and yeah is something that we'll uh
try to put together uh throughout hack
week
uh a minimum you know concept because
there are like a lot of uh
corner cases we have to uh be kinda like
aware of not
not to be completely ddosed but the
basic idea is
uh basically an augmentation of
something that
uh steven uh sketched out like way back
something like 2017 or something like
that where
we basically say that
there is some way for you as a client
to query uh
other peers for what we call an sid
which is essentially just a
different uh streaming hash function be
it you know sha 1 shuttle 56 75 doesn't
matter
anything that can basically restart
itself with minimal state
and you get back a
a set of blocks
that you a manifest that describes a set
of blocks that
if you pull out you should be able to
assemble this into a stream that you can
then
verify with this additional information
the manifest which basically tells you
at every uh
megabyte or so what with with a
particular
initialization vector of the hash that
you are using for this s id if you
run it against the data that you already
got
you should end up with the very same sid
as the cache of the entire thing and
yeah uh
we basically mapped the higher level uh
portion of that and
uh i didn't know uh checking with uh
with other folks which one of our
options they like best
and uh yeah we'll see how this goes
during half week and so i have
i think next one is real
sure um relevant thing to ipld last week
i took state diff and the graphql stuff
and pulled that up to actors v3
um so it now has a realized file coin
schema with the new
schema it turns out that was a lot of
code duplication
but no actual changes um
which is exciting um and that's because
i don't actually schema
the hamps themselves i just pretend
like they are their adls so i pretend
like it is a map
and both before and after they are maps
so none of the types in my
representation of the schema change
however i have to duplicate all of the
types
so that i know that i am in a v3
node and therefore when i see a hamped
in that v3 node i should use the newer
camped loader to load those hands
so i have essentially now multiple
versions
that are tagged just on their struct
names um for the older and newer
style nodes throughout filecoin so and
so that my loader
can based on which one it's which
subtree it's in
if it's in av3 versus a v2 um state
route
know which camp loader it should be
using when it runs into one of these amp
types but that seems to largely be
working
the pressure has
reduced somewhat as the v3 actor upgrade
is still pending
um the two things i will call out uh on
that
one um the file coin people did not
change all of their hamps to v3 hamps
there are still some v2 hamps lurking in
bioplane
so we will still not have a full data
model uh even after this upgrade
um in particular messages uh as
linked from each block header are still
linked using the previous camp
and there is no versioning pointer uh on
the block header or
the messages struct in which to signal
that it should now
use a different amp implementation uh
unlike the state routes
so they are thinking about how to do
that and hope that
at some point in the future they will
and likely expect to do it just on
a block height so once you end up with a
block header
whose height is above some number you
now know that the messages will be
encoded in a different way so there will
be a new implicit thing to
learn the other implicit thing is bit
widths
which previously we just sort of had as
this constant five that we knew of in
terms of how you size and think about
hamps are now parameterized and are
different in different hamps
um and this is another sort of piece of
data that somewhere lives in the schema
because there are sometimes where you
run into these stamps and you're like oh
this is a hampton with bit with six
and versus these ones are camps with it
with five um
i don't know if we have a great place to
encode that um
anywhere um besides a comment
but it is important certainly when we go
to mutate
um i think less so when you go to read
although it is useful to know
i think you can infer it from uh how
wide
the bit width is of that bit field
potentially
but there is this additional implicit
parameter that's been added
that you know they just keep making
rod's life easy
um i think that's all i have to say
about uh amps and
that data structure uh and indeed for
this week um
starting to work on uh the javascript
uh side of things i have
jsipfs building and in a browser and it
seems to get a node id and connect to
things
using the new web pack which uh oh boy
it now no longer does all the polyfills
for you in v5 so you have to
notice all of the various things that
don't exist and slowly fix them until
things load but it doesn't eventually
load so that's good
and so now i think the the first step is
can i get
using like the dht providers to find all
the nodes that are also interested in
the same sid and then from there make a
pub sub
group around that collection of nodes to
be able to send messages to other people
in a room
and do some sort of message back-end
transport in the browser
so that's the time for this one cool
thanks next is rod
uh it's one of those weeks where i've
had to go back and try and catalog what
i've done because it doesn't feel like
i've achieved a big
chunk of anything um and but that but
that is because i was looking after the
kids mostly last week so i actually
didn't get much done
um so dad jason was on the cards i've
been really digging in heavily to that
because i'm
i can taste completion of that i really
feel like i've tied up dag pb and dag
seabor
i i really want dak jason done because i
i just
i keep on wanting to use it for test
fixtures um
just to be able to express
anything you want to do with block
mutations and creations in a
readable test uh in a test that you can
copy and paste
so that's that really is my main
motivation with diaper bag jason but
getting it
just consistent and sorted out would be
really nice completion so
um trying really hard to get that i've
got a new
uh i don't know i think i was at the
meeting last week so some of this is
from the week before but
i have a new javascript implementation
that
um uses a lot of the same back end code
as the dagsebor work that i did
um to do parsing and encoding uh
in the sort of the deterministic way
with all the rules that we care about
um and the reason i did that was not
i was skeptical that i could actually
replace the the current one because of
speed but
it turns out i can like the speed is is
um
comparable and even better in some
places so um
that's great but um the
the thing i wanted to get to was this
problem that eric's having with
um the tokens in um the
cid and bytes how you how
as you as you're essentially stream
reading it
you want to be able to bail early and
either say
this is not what i think it is and it's
just some standard map
or it's a malformed bytes or cid or it
is a cid
or bytes um and so that processing step
we don't classically haven't had to deal
with in javascript because you just
didn't substantiate the whole thing and
then you
inspect it um but if you do it in a
streaming fashion then it becomes a
different beast and so
i wanted to get to that so i could play
around with it to um
describe those rules so um in the pull
request that i've linked for
the specs repo for dag jason i've got
i've i've described those rules
i know there's been some comments on
that for um fixing up the language
which i am appreciative of because it's
it's hard to describe them clearly
um so i'll try and um
focus on getting that done the other
thing was i
i did i have been meaning to ask eric
where the
iple prime version is at because he
started a
pull request to properly add the
bytes and i think cid stuff into
ipld prime and that that was then just
sitting on a branch that he sort of
abandoned but the branch now seems to be
gone so i'm wondering if
that works just been completely thrown
away and we need to sort of start again
um or something else so it'd be nice to
get iple prime up to scratch with this
as well that's really the end goal is to
have the two implementations
work exactly the same um the other thing
i've been playing a lot with is the
encryption stuff that michael started um
the
pull request in the specs repo and the
one in multi formats um
trying to work out
it because we really are even though
like yeah let's use aes
we're still inventing a new crypto
and and that has all of the you know the
caveats about
you shouldn't invent your own crypto
system um
that come along with it uh so just been
trying to
um figure out all of the boundaries of
this thing so that
when we roll it out we can say things
like this is good for
these situations and it has sensible
defaults and it won't let you
do a foot gun for most cases but please
don't use it in these
places because it you won't get the
guarantees that you expect
um and that's
yeah there's a lot of space for that um
if people just pick this off the shelf
saying here's a generic
encryption thing that i could use for my
application which does
it has a particular model of moving data
around
um there's potential for things to go
bad so
yeah anyway some thoughts have been sort
of dropping into that specs pr um
and yeah we'll see we'll move forward on
that soon
yeah i need to reply to that i've been
meaning to um but yeah
we should we should put in there which
of these algorithms that we recommend
like which of these is the best because
it's silly to not do that and just have
a list of
algorithms um yeah and then whatever
other algorithms we want to add like i
i don't care what they are like they're
just they're just cipher entries in the
multi-formats table right like we're not
ensuring that there's an implementation
around
um i think i think that's me
yeah thanks and next is carlson
hi i'm the uh i'm the outsider here and
i'm actually in a
public space so i got to keep the mask
on um
i'm in a hotel lobby so i'll keep it
super short i've
listed a few things that i'm
doing this week including tinkering with
some of the ipsql
sql proofs as crdt's stuff that
hopefully a couple slides will you can
go through later
and that's related to some work that
i've been doing around uh
merkel tags as crdts
um a general purpose crdt um so that's
quite exciting uh for me to see to just
today i was reading some of
michael's stuff and it was like oh damn
we can solve
a lot of problems with this like cid set
primitive so that's really cool um
uh i've also started um doing some sort
of like documentation on the
textile front and in doing so started
releasing a bunch of
javascript libraries for like very
simple primitives for testing
peer-to-peer like systems so i just
released a library
called lib p2p bundle which basically is
just the
the lib p2p bundle that is used as the
default in ipfs
so that if you want just to adjust the
lib p2p bundle
that exactly ipfs uses
but you just want the p2p bundle you can
just use that all the defaults are the
same
and it turns out to be super duper handy
because i can just drop that in
without having to get a whole like limp
p2p repo setup and everything
and it's zero config and it just kind of
works so that's nice and i'll put a
little more effort into
packaging that up a bit nicer for like
um a full yes build so that you could
just
kind of pull the es module in a browser
and a few things like that but for now
it's pretty handy
and i've it's helped me test a bunch of
like peer-to-peer just like block
exchange algorithms really easily
and so in coupled with that i released
something called lib p2p rpc
which lets you then that uses um
uh michael's really simple rpc library
so that you can just like test test
different rpc configurations and you
just use this lib p2p bundle
and it's really easy you can test all
sorts of really cool like graph sync
algorithms and things really quickly so
that's been quite fun and
i got a little sidetracked with that
because i've been playing around with
you know different block exchange
algorithms um
and so it turns out you can take those
same sort of tools and do like fetch the
fetch api
overlay p2p and also all sorts of other
neat things and then you realize that if
you can get two peers two browser peers
connected over like webrtc you can do
like http queries between the two of
them
and some fun things like that so that
you get a pure acting like a server and
a
server acting like a peer which is fun
um
and then on the textile front we just
had a big team meeting where
we're trying to unify how we do like
tokens and access
across our stack and we're starting to
lean towards something that the
fission team has been working on called
ucans user
access tokens basically it's a way to
encode
a jwt with like nested permissioning
and if you take that and you couple with
some of the deg jose work that
um uh that oed and i
helped to fund then you can get like
basically
ipld structures that nest permissions
and so you can pass like with a you know
with like as a header you can say look
here's my
my you can and whoever's operating that
you can can trace
the history of like permission
allocation all the way back to the root
and those that's with an ipld link
so you can do things like say look i own
this data but i'm telling
this i'm telling this peer that they can
also
do some sort of operation and i sign
that
and then i link my initial signature in
the
ucan and then that gear can pass that
you can along and say look so and so
said i could do this
and you can trace it all the way back to
the root permission
and um so you can start to and the rule
is like those permissions have to be
less than or equal to the permissions of
the like root
so you can have like increasingly
permission allocation in a sort of
trustless
or well you can trust that the the route
is is allowed to give those permissions
and then
you can start to do some really great
like capability based access control
with that so that's something we're
exploring and it's looking pretty
promising
um yeah super cool sounds like
object capabilities um it's what it's
based on yep exactly
yeah and uh huge props to the uk to the
fission team
for like marrying jwts and some of
google's um
uh oh what's that french dessert called
macaroons google's macaroons sort of uh
setup and jwts and ipld kind of all
placed together this way it's quite
it's quite a simple but powerful
like access control primitive
if you've got a link to some of these
things that would be really great in the
docs
in so that we can look them up because
that sounds really interesting that
what you just mentioned yeah yeah it's
cool yeah i'll i'll provide some links
thanks carlson um eric do you have an
update
uh not a ton this week didn't come super
prepared sorry
uh maybe off the top of my cuff um
i did a little bit of code review with
daniel and a couple of other people this
week and
realized that like maybe i actually need
to back down on one of the approaches
that i was taking to the schema dmt
unification stuff the boilerplate
it actually got out of hand so we're
thinking about
actually cycle breaking with that in a
different way the
problem originated from
having our generated code
had methods on it which could expose
their own type information
self-describingly and that meant
it ended up with a cycle and so we're
actually thinking we might just stop
doing that because so far that feature
has actually been kind of hypothetical
in its utility
so like maybe just we won't
and that'll let us break some of the
cycles that were previously problematic
and maybe let us get through this with
just a lot less kerfuffle so that's
probably in the future
all right thanks
um charlie do you have an update
yeah just so the stuff i'm working on
with uh the did specification and just
the drama behind it
so michael and rod i appreciate your
comments and helping me out and
juan chimed into and i think uh
just trying to figure out and they get
navigate politically the path forward
it's not about the technology
or just the the lack of the ipl deal
with the dag
cbo respect not being like normative
referenced then actually it's
getting booted out of the the did
specification or
the fact that i borrowed some of the
canonical algorithm
text from the spec but i put it in the
sebor section
hoping that this the dagsebor section
will inherit it
and so then it opens up the whole
pandora's box as far as
contribution and ipr and
uh and then mime types and just that's
just
uh oh the drama
so i i'm not sure what the path forward
is there actually some uh
talk about maybe creating in the did
spec registries
um but it's that would be places to put
properties
not um core representations so
there's if we bump it out of the spec
which is going to canada release the
next like a week or two
then um it's just gonna get dropped and
which is frustrating because i've been
like
involved for like two years now and to
get i wanted to see
did documents as uh that dag
seaborn uh and mostly the
uh anyways frustrating
thanks um well well done on your
patients anyway because
even just a couple of weeks in that
thread has been stretching mine
so
yeah yeah
so this was
the updates um is there anything else
on the agenda else we get michael to
present some of his stuff
yeah michael do you want to i don't see
anything yeah let's do it
let's do it okay start the broadcast
i'm sharing my screen now here we go
here we go um probably okay we'll just
do what we can get through
um which is good because towards the end
i run out of steam a little bit
um okay so sql proofs
okay so the the sort of if you separate
a database into three different parts
it becomes much clearer how you do kind
of decentralized database and
essentially a sql in particular um in
this model
so we're really separating kind of state
transitions
from like over a consistent state
representation
so you need these transitions and then
you need to refer to the states of those
transitions
um and you need to do that over a mutex
right so a database usually offers you
like some kind of head
that people have agreed to that you're
doing that on um
and so you have you have sort of state
on a mutex
um and then storage is separate from
that and i think that we're all
really used to separating out that
storage layer and that that being sort
of any key value store that you can put
the blocks in but
um i think for you know other people
that that's going to be
pretty new um usually a database writes
to a very specific
file format that you continue to run um
so if you look at like original database
architecture we just have
like one state we need to move it to the
second state
and we're taking a bunch of operations
and doing kind of intermediate
transactions that we can roll back
um as we do that and then we eventually
kind of commit it to this mutex
um in a typical database that's done
with like an fsync call where you
actually like
write all about the disk um and sort of
batch up the entire transaction
and you know if it's if you want to
guarantee that it's in multiple
locations then that's actually an sync
in multiple computers and different
places and then
what this all means is that when you get
back a response for a right you have a
guarantee that that is actually written
to disk
that that is actually the state that
everybody agrees on now right
okay so f-sync really doesn't work for
distributed systems right like we can't
we can't put all of our guarantees on
top of this
um and if we want decentralized systems
like we're probably going to do that
with cryptography right like we want to
we want to replicate um some of these uh
guarantees that we're getting
in a decentralized system um and
so many databases like in the nosql
world and
are are eventually consistent and highly
scalable
because it turns out that if you want to
do sql you it's really hard to make it
entirely consistent and distributed
because you can't really model it
without like one of these epson
guarantees um so what
most uh big scale databases end up being
is like a lower level primitive than sql
it doesn't do as much a sql it does like
a fraction of what sql does often
um but you can model on this behavior on
top of it and then you're working with a
primitive that can do everything
but uh what we want to do here is
actually take all of sql
and actually give you sql as a language
to do the manipulation
um and allow that to work in a
distributed system
so okay so that's what we're going to
use sql proofs for
so a single proof is just a functional
transformation it literally takes an
input hash
and it produces an output hash um and
for that implementation and version of
ip sql it will always produce that hash
right like that's that's completely
deterministic
once this stabilizes and turns into a
spec then it'll be like really
consistent right
um but we're essentially talking about
this deterministic state transfer
from one state to another um and the the
input
is the current hash of the database and
a sql statement
we take those things together and hash
it that's that's the input hash right
um the output uh is a little bit more
complicated it's not just the sort of
database after that like we're talking
about
reads and writes here we're not just
talking about rights
um what you get back is a result
so when you're doing a sql query uh
guild kit
act like a bunch of column data right um
if you're doing a right you won't get a
result
and then you get two sets essentially
one is the blocks for the reads and one
is the blocks for the rights
um and if you're just doing a read you
obviously you won't have any rights
um and these cid sets are our trees just
like the sort of chunky trees that i've
been talking about forever that we built
the database on
um but we can like continue to improve
and refine these even further but they
already are like
really capable data structures for doing
comparisons
um and then finally you get the hash at
the end of executing the statement so if
it was a query then it'll be the same
hash as the input hash
but if it's if it's changed the database
then now you have the new head of the
database at the end of the
statement okay
very important to lock in right here
that we are
not talking about traversals and we are
not describing traversals as part of
these data structures
um there are obviously traversals
happening when you execute a sql
statement you're going to traverse the
tree
but we what will you get back in this
proof is not
anything that tells you about traversing
and we never
ship around anything about traversing
between peers what we ship around
are these proofs that have sets of
all of the block addresses that were
accessed um and you don't have to
traverse beyond that to understand the
working set of data
and this is really important because we
we can compare these all of the time to
produce deltas right
it's not just that a write will produce
a cid set that is a delta on the
previous state
it's also that a read gives me back
a set of all the data that it took to
read it and
if i run that query again on a new
database state
i can take the new set and compare it
against the old set and get back the
delta
um so if we're talking about you know
like what we sort of do with graph sync
today
we we actually never do more than one
request and response anymore right
if i need you to do a sql query i'm
going to say hey run this query
and instead of sending me back like the
entire proof or all of the see
the reads in that set give me back the
delta between that and this prior state
that i had before and you can just get
back that delta
so you you can turn like every
synchronization operation in every
application operation into a
like a quick request response cycle
um so
yeah so the producer are both the state
chains they're both these transactional
state changes and they're also the read
interface
um so that's like important to keep in
mind um
and i haven't even gotten into how
mutexes work but
you can you can imagine a chain of these
right that is like updating a database
in the storage somewhere
you could you know publish that new
states in in ipns
you can stick it you know somewhere else
that's permanent and authority like
however you want to say
this is the current state of the
database like you you can say that about
what you get at the end of this proof
right
um i talked about this a little bit
beginning but it's really important to
note that like
these proofs do not reduce the amount of
computation that somebody would need to
do to verify them
they only reduce the set of data um but
they do that incredibly well
so you know you can have a data provider
or it can literally be untrusted
and they have access to all of the data
which could be
petabytes right and what you get back
is you know just the the small fraction
of that data
that is necessary to verify the proof
that you just got for your query or for
your mutation
um okay any questions until
before we move on actually i should
probably like pause for a second
um i have one so if you so the sets
return
do they only return the the
leave of your query or every ca you've
encountered
every cid every cid it's literally um
like it's literally a set that gets
passed like
in javascript it's literally a set that
gets passed through the entire read
interface
so every time that it reads a block of
data
um or pulls um a node out of cache that
has a block address associated with
it that gets added to a set and um
and yeah yeah and so it's it's literally
like the entire tree all the way up so
you would never need to
to do traversal that's why it's the and
it's also the entire merkle proof though
right so it's not just the leaves of
that tree
it's all the branches that it took to
get there yeah because you can then
trace that back from the roots and
verify the proof
yeah so so these sets can actually be
passed around
by their root because they're like uh
yeah
okay yeah yeah yeah and and the great
thing about them right is that like if
you encrypt the data
um then you can um you don't have to
encrypt
the tree on top of those addresses right
like you can have a bunch of encrypted
addresses that are in a set
and the set itself is actually like
readable and so you can pass that around
like in the clear and use it for your
replication state
yeah nice yeah and you can and you can
refer to that set just by
obviously um yeah and i mean and these
are like
designed for efficient teletubs between
each other right like that's
that's where we get set data structures
from um and these are no different
um yeah i think that we've actually
covered everything in this this slide
already
um cool um
yeah okay so let's like see it right
real quick um so yeah so we take this uh
db is null because we're creating a new
database we we say create table with the
schema
um and what we get back is a set of all
the writes that were necessary for that
and the new db right so if we're
you know implementing this database we
just write all those to storage we
update whenever mutex
you do an insert so we're going to
insert some values into here now
what we get back is like the new writes
the new state
we do the same thing again now we're
updating our database
pretty cool um something
that is really interesting about this
and i'll talk about this a little bit
because i haven't had time to create
slides around it yet
the schema for a table acts like a
contract
it ensures that whoever runs these
proofs
in the future when they do new inserts
is going to do the work of generating
the indexing structures that you need in
order to do the where queries against
those columns
so that's a really kind of cool feature
right like we
as you kind of design your tables and
design what you're doing you're also
sort of baking these operate like these
uh requirements into the
operations that get run on them um
another really interesting thing happens
with dag tables right so
i haven't documented this yet but i have
a dag table implementation where
um it's rows just like a rig just like a
typical sql database
but what you insert are cids to whole
graphs um
and then the column names that you add
for the schema are paths into that
structure
and so what happens in in this uh when
it
is implemented as like this contract
right is that you're effectively
plucking off the data
in the graph that you need for these
indexing structures
and you're not actually storing the rest
so if you know all of the indexing that
you need on a huge chain
um and you don't want to store the
entire graph because it's huge like it's
the file coin chain for instance
um you can bake into the contract oh
traverse these properties to create
these indexes and then every time that
somebody does a write of a new state
we know that those traversals will
happen in order to get those indexes and
those reads will show up in the read set
but the read set won't include the rest
of the graph that we didn't say that we
needed to index
right so this is like an efficient sort
of plucking structure as you as you go
over time as well um let's look at reads
real quick
so yeah uh we do see we select
we get back a result um that result also
has
a hash on it so if i do proofs in the
future i can check
um if the result is changed by just
looking at the hash which is really nice
um provided that i that i trust the
other party
um and then i get back all the reads
that were done
and the database um at the end of the
transaction
um yeah these both have hash addresses
right like
we we can we hash the block for the
input the output is hashed as well
and now we actually know that this hash
produces this hash so this can just be
cached
forever right um i don't oh did i i
didn't write that in here i don't think
um oh damn that's so cool though um but
if
if you imagine sort of structuring um
this operation as an http request
so you're putting in the http request
like uh the different states
that you're changing that http request
can be cached forever
right in in whatever caching layer
because it's just this hash to that hash
the same thing happens when you're doing
delta calculations if you say do this
query on this hash
but then only return me a car file of
the delta
between this prior read set then it's
going to return you a car file in that
htm request and that
whole thing can also be cached like
forever in hp cache
um yeah we talked about that um yeah
so now we uh we insert new data into the
database
we run the query again with the new
database state and oh
yep we got this new read this this new
set of
uh reads for the cids um we can then oh
yeah i do have that in here sorry
but yeah um yeah so if we as we i just
talked about this i don't need to talk
about it again but yeah if you have like
literally like give me the read deal
then the response can be cached forever
and i'm really thinking that like
car files actually are the exchange
mechanism i think in whatever protocol
that you build on this
um because unlike sort of cadb and the
stuff that i've been working
working on that has an indexing
structure over it you always need all of
these blocks and you always just load
all these blocks
linearly when you get them you actually
don't seek into them because
since you're already doing delta
calculations everywhere you always want
all the blocks so you're always going to
actually just occur like soak all of
them up iteratively
so yeah i think that car file is really
like the right way to be moving this
data around
um yeah so like why actually why don't i
pause here again so
uh questions at this point um
what does rod think
um so
because i've been so recently playing
with the file coin data my mind
immediately jumps to scale
like this kind of stuff is it's perfect
for
this is perfect for large structures of
data that you want to query and mutate
because i mean that's what sql is good
for
taking something really large and
narrowing down into the thing that you
want
and these cod sets just make me think
it's there's a lot of cids
[Music]
there's a lot of data held and
dealt with in memory well
the sets aren't necessarily in memory
they can be in storage
yeah and and i know like these are all
practical concerns that
can come later um my concern is mainly
simply that i don't think that we
uh have um
uh i i don't think we're
actually very good at making sure that
those
practical concerns actually play out um
we don't have a good track record of
that and so
i am becoming more concerned about that
um and we do a lot of theoretical work
but
um when the rubber hits the road the
things stop i mean
in in some ways i feel like a lot of
these um
the sort of garbage collection issues
that we have right now um
in sort of trimming the set of data um
really comes from from
in a belief that we were really going to
be able to use traversals for a lot of
this stuff that we could describe
certain traversals that would give us
just the data that we need or just sync
the data that we need and stuff like
that
and i think that that's actually not
panning out like a lot of like
these ideas are coming from a place
where like actually like every time that
i need something from you i need to be
able to talk about deltas like we need
to be able to move around just a part of
this data
um i need to be able to describe to you
just the data that you need for
something
it's like actually like a like kind of
more important than even the structure
of the database in a way
is that we have these sets that we can
be comparing against
yeah yeah yeah because because i'm even
that you know
the garbage collection thing now the
stuff i'm playing with this week um i'm
just messing around with with browser
video stuff but
i'm still having to i coming against the
data the uh
the garbage collection thing like i
wanted i want to do ipl data structures
but
i need to be able to efficiently discard
the things that i don't use anymore when
i do changes and
it's just so painful yeah
yeah yeah just working with arbitrarily
large and long
graphs is you know difficult um
yeah yeah um what was the other thing
that i was gonna say
um oh yeah
there's another really interesting thing
about this i'll talk about this because
it's it's like at
the very end of these slides and i
haven't had time to really work it out
yet
um or haven't had time to document it
yet but
when i said like you can use these like
crdts what i mean is that
because they're a one-way functional
transform right you can always test if
two changes compute
they're sorry commute um because you can
just apply them against each other and
if you have the same hash like you're
good
um and there's like a little bit of
extra stuff that you want to do to like
get
pure append inserts out of the way which
you can do by examining the sql ast
but for the most part like you can
actually you know take a thousand
transactions on the same state that you
sort of figured out what you wanted to
do in parallel
and then you can um again in parallel
test all of those in pairs of two and
commute them right
so you you literally can run all of them
concurrently
um in pairs of two and then pair that
down in half and then pair that down in
half from there
and that that can be a very expensive
operation to do
but one of the really nice things about
having a set for the reads and a set for
the rights
for every one of the transactions that
you're commuting is that when you
launch another process or you hand this
off to a
whatever concurrency vector that you're
using you know
like all of the blocks that you need to
access in order to do it
with like a 99.9 probability like
most of these commutation operations are
going to happen in these threads without
needing any other reads other than what
you hand to them
because you just took the the sets and
put them together um
there there are edge cases in which you
end up causing
merges in the tree when you change it
and so like
every 10 000 changes to
like an integer index for instance will
end up probably changing one of the
um like causing one of these three
merges and then
that tree may need to read data to the
right that it didn't actually have that
it was already handed to it to commute
it so we just need access to the same
data that
the whoever launched the process had so
it may need to do like one block read
right away but that's literally all that
we need to do so
you you you can actually do all of these
like crdt
commuting things um in parallel without
a ton of i o
which is nice um
yeah any more questions or comments
well on the crdt front so for almost
all operations where like you're adding
or querying the like beauty of the
append only like
mergeability of sets like you're as you
commuting no problem and then there's a
and then only in the situation where
like you're mutating state and removing
something and in fact want to actually
clean up
the the blocks that you have do you have
to worry about like
knowing if some if some past
like uh mutation deleted something and
then another one
added it back or vice versa so let's see
where
there would be okay right is that right
does that make sense no no it's actually
it's a little bit simpler than that
right
so um this is how it would work one is
that you you need to look at the sql ast
once to see um if it's a pure insert
without a read associated with it
and if it's a pure insert then um you
can actually
just you know that that'll commute with
all the other inserts
but if you try to apply them in
different orders you're actually you are
going to get a different hash so you
need to like set those aside
um then like for the rest of the query
you're going to have some kind of
read on write semantics going on um
and and so and you cannot predict in sql
what that looks like right like it's
things get crazy
like in if you look at the kind of
backflips that postgres has to do
to figure out like um which
intermediate state changes that it needs
access to and stuff it gets pretty
complicated um but like sql is just such
a powerful language you can do like the
like multiple selects that do math and
commute things together and then produce
the right that you're doing
right and so if you've got a thousand
rights that are all happening at once
you like have no way by looking at the
tree really
to know like oh this one ended up like
reading some data that this other guy
wrote
actually uh right or wrote over or
changed so the e
so the easiest thing to do is literally
just to like run the statement against
each other's
state and then see if the hashes match
or not
right like that's the easy way to do it
there's there's a i
was talking with mikola about it and he
was like well no there's a bunch of
stuff that we could do to actually like
narrow that down so there's
there's a way that you can get out of
like a lot of the computational
like overhead but there i think that
there's always going to end up being
some really complex sql cases that
you'll you'll need to like not do that
and just always be running the statement
to check again
but as you cut them right you're just
kind of jamming the statements together
actually
like you you're just sort of like adding
one statement to another as you commute
them and you're adding the the read and
write sets
and then at the very end of commuting
all of them you would just want to
re-run
the whole combined query set so that
what you end up with is a proof that is
um what like doesn't include all the
orphan data that might have changed
right you know the commuting operations
yeah that's the easiest way to commute
them actually like it's it's probably
that's probably easier
than trying to go through the tree and
figure out what was orphaned from the
set
right so you just collect them all and
then rerun the query and
trim it that way yep yep yeah that's i
mean
the thing about sql queries is that like
the data structures are designed to
reduce the computational load
so this mindset that you get into
especially when you're working with
blockchains which is like how do i
decrease like
processing i don't increase processing
how do i get like all of that down
um like sql is all about sort of
building data structures that are
fast to query and easy to query and so
just kind of let sql
do that um and you know get out of the
way and
really work with like how do we define
the subsets of data that are needed and
reduce the amount of data needed for
operations
yeah um i think i'm out of time now so
this is probably a good place to stop
yeah i was just about to say that
so um thanks everyone for attending
and see you all again next week
bye everyone